feat(rfc): Heartbeat monitoring (#44)
getsentry/rfcs: text/0044-heartbeat.md

- Start Date: 2022-12-09
- RFC Type: feature
- RFC PR: N/A
- RFC Status: draft

# Summary

> Introduce an infrastructure monitoring agent in all SDKs supported by us. This agent will be triggered every time the user launches the application and will send us information about the state of their integration with Sentry.

Reviewer: > Introduce an infrastructure monitoring agent

I think this sentence is making a decision on what the RFC is about, instead of focusing on the problem.

Author: Do you have any suggestion on how we could better describe it?

Reviewer 2: the problem statement is something like this I think:

> Today Sentry is relies on receiving errors and transactions from SDKs to take users into the rest of their onboarding experience. This reliance seems to put a weighted importance on pushing the user to send a transaction or error to confirm they have done things correctly. Pushing them through an early process which is an opportunity loss for Sentry and the user to appreciate what they can do with the product.

I'd say that is more or less the problem. And the solution proposal or direction is something like we want SDKs to be able to send a functionally useful event/message which is not dependant on an error or transaction trigger from a specific application/service.

> Introduce an infrastructure monitoring agent in all SDKs supported by us. This agent will be triggered every time the user launches the application and will send us information about the state of their integration with Sentry.

Reviewer: > send us information about the state of their integration

Does "the state of their integration" refer to the configuration of the SDK? What information are we looking for specifically?

Author: state means:

On -> The connection of the user's SDK with Sentry was established
Off -> There is no connection between the user's SDK and Sentry

Reviewer 2: @iker-barriocanal for now it will be rather simple - boolean initialized or not basically

but in the future that could scale and be dependent on platform. Thinking of scaling serverside services and their "alive" status or time alive. Versus client side where that type feature would not be so interesting. Every browser opened for example. But we are getting past scope of the initial phase, But I think you were correct above it is important to consider when determining what event makes sense for future planning of the payload.

> Introduce an infrastructure monitoring agent in all SDKs supported by us. This agent will be triggered every time the user launches the application and will send us information about the state of their integration with Sentry.

Reviewer 3: I would not call this "infrastructure monitpring agent". This has a different meaning in the industry. What we want is a heartbeat that carries diagnostic data.

Author: will update this...thanks for the feedback

> Introduce an infrastructure monitoring agent in all SDKs supported by us. This agent will be triggered every time the user launches the application and will send us information about the state of their integration with Sentry.

Author: ```suggestion
Introduce a heartbeat in all SDKs supported by us. The heartbeat will carry diagnostic data and will be triggered every time the user launches the application.
```

# Motivation

As part of the [SDK onboarding improvements initiative](https://www.notion.so/sentry/SDK-Onboarding-Improvements-261a3d1deed94522bcff1361fc8bd756) (employees only), user tests have recently been done, where we collect data about the user experience when trying to integrate Sentry for the first time with their applications.

Several discoveries were made, but one in particular that caught our attention is that many users, after following all the installation steps and sending the first error, were confused and frustrated if they did not see it in the Sentry's application.

> After refreshing the Sentry's application page a few times to see if they get an error and not getting it, they were left wondering if they missed something while configuring Sentry, which led them to open the onboarding documentation again.

Author: refers to an event that did not hit Sentry. It may happen that instrumentation with Sentry has not been configured correctly

> After refreshing the Sentry's application page a few times to see if they get an error and not getting it, they were left wondering if they missed something while configuring Sentry, which led them to open the onboarding documentation again.

Reviewer 2: yes I think a session for example would also be a good fit

we want to know that the SDK is connected with right DSN and the init is fundamentally correct

>  they were left wondering if they missed something

the UI reacting to session received at init for example would solve this. "we see you're connected now waiting for errors and txns" for example

> We also noticed that when they successfully sent an issue to Sentry, they were confused as they were taken to the issue stream page without receiving any feedback in the UI, which was initially awaiting for an event.

Reviewer: > they were taken to the issue stream page without receiving any feedback in the UI

What feedback are we looking for specifically? I assume we are looking for some specific feedback, besides the issue stream page changing from "no new issues" to a list with an issue from an event a user just sent.

Reviewer 2: entirety of instrumentation being correct would be difficult to state

but we could simply know the init is correct for now, and what the future of this would be is adding more information about what is configured in the init. What options have they set for example, ideally even options which have default values

the product could then know what _should_ be working, so these initial steps with a simple event are the POC stage

next step the product has more information prior to ever requiring an error or transaction about what all that project should do, and what the user already did so we don't waste their time

# Supporting Data

AJ:

> I am looking at cohort where of all the orgs sending txn only 13% actually use perf

I believe orgs sending txn rate is pretty good for new projects because most devs don’t look at the details in the code snippet and end up sending txn. However, the challenge is they don’t know about Perf or never go there

# Options Considered

## Heartbeat/Pulse endpoint

Create an endpoint called heartbeat or pulse that would be used via a request whenever the user successfully launches their app.

The request body would initially be quite simple, containing only the following:

`{type: 'heartbeat'}`

> Sentry when collecting this information will be able to give feedback to the user through the user interface, such as that he can now send an error or perform other actions.

Author: We saw during the user testing sessions that we did, that after the user went through all the onboarding steps and sent an error, he would get frustrated if the error wasn't coming, making him wonder if he missed something during the configuration, for instance, if the DSN he used was correct. 

We just want to give the user the feedback that a connection was successfully established so he can discard, for instance the DSN,  from his troubleshooting list

> Sentry when collecting this information will be able to give feedback to the user through the user interface, such as that he can now send an error or perform other actions.

Reviewer 4: I get this, but we also can have here same problem. 

If we don't, in the implementation, introduce some kind of QoS for these heartbeats, they could be stuck somewhere in pipeline, can be delayed and won't give expected (fast) feedback. 

I'm talking about e.g: 
* network latency (which could be difficult to account for in some cases)
* or maybe the ingesting/processing queues are full with other types of messages and heartbeats won't be forwarded just right away

I'm not sure if this, QoS-related discussion, should be the part this RFC or later the part of the implementation. But I wanted just to mention it here so it won't get lost.

> Sentry when collecting this information will be able to give feedback to the user through the user interface, such as that he can now send an error or perform other actions.

Reviewer 2: great points

> For me, ability to send the errors / events / envelopes only shows that everything is working

i don't think we want to get to a place where the product can state "everything is configured correctly" that is a bold statement without knowledge of which frameworks and DB integrations they need, then if that SDK supports auto instrumentation for them etc.

But the product can at least start to say "hey you are definitely connected" as a step 1. Further iterations of this would include info about the options which have been configured in the init and set by default, sentry would know a bit more.all without the requirement of pushing them to send an error or txn

> QoS
yes I think we can say this out of scope for the time being :D

This is [one of the designs](https://www.figma.com/file/4EkecQGYtbpOY1G6oEir4X/Exploration%3A-User-Journey?node-id=215%3A1147&t=fGJbtdmq2tDAI8iE-0) we have in mind for the UI (employees only).

> In the future, we can also use this mechanism to send other information to Sentry, such as whether the user has configured performance, profiling, etc.

Reviewer 5: I think this sentence might decide what we're gonna build eventually. For the simple "one message after startup without data", I think sessions make sense. If we want diagnostics data, and maybe even send these data periodically, then we should build a separate mechanism.

## Session

> We're still not sure about this option and are planning to work on a Spike, but the idea is that we'll be able to use the user's session to find out if Sentry's integration with an SDK is working properly.

Reviewer 5: This approach makes sense to me, because sessions already represent what we are looking for. It would give us the heartbeat infrastructure for free. Not sure if all SDKs send session updates unconditionally though, and whether the latency would be acceptable (sessions are aggregated in relay instances along the way, so it might take up to one minute for it to show up in the UI).

Author: Users could get confused if they don't get immediate feedback. Unless we inform them about it in the UI

Author: is this also the case of the "envelop"?

Reviewer 5: As discussed in-person: we would probably always build this on top of our metrics infrastructure to make it scalable. So we would have the same delays as with sessions if we build something new.

To me it seems that the questions "Is this SDK alive?" and "Did this SDK have a session?" are equivalent, so we might as well build this feature with sessions.

Reviewer 2: Agreed. Sessions make a lot of sense to start

> so it might take up to one minute for it to show up in the UI).

I don't think this is so bade TBH. Is it better we push them to send some error and eject them from onbaording for example? 1 minute isn;t that long when someone is presented with new content to digest

Reviewer 2: > Not sure if all SDKs send session updates unconditionally though

which conditions are you referring to?

there are definitely differences across SDKs though whether due to technical need or difference in implementation. Some are auto, some don't send at init (so I heard), others manual. But I think many top prio SDKs aupport auto and at init, which would support this POC work and help justifiy the need to scale should there be proof positive

Reviewer 5: > which conditions are you referring to?

I wasn't sure if all SDKs send sessions by default, and whether they start sending sessions right after startup. So basically what you said.

Author: yes, for now we are mainly focusing on JavaScript Browser SDKs and according to the [doc](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1TzLYBTzFFKnPaR4IqGt-u6ypYU2iaxIGQG--4mdi618/edit#gid=337502117) all of them send sessions automatically

# Drawbacks

We would like to know through this RFC if there are any drawbacks that we should consider

> # Unresolved questions

Reviewer 3: They are onboarding. If they are using an old SDK for that, something went wrong in the first place already.

> # Unresolved questions

Reviewer 6: I can think of cases where you might run into that case:
- Needing to use an old SDK version because of compatibility issues.
- Migrating orgs/projects.

- Start Date: 2022-12-09
- RFC Type: feature
- RFC PR: N/A
- RFC Status: Approved

# Summary

Through “heartbeat” monitoring, we want a way for the SDKs to communicate with Sentry so that they are at the bare minimum connected.

> This will also be expanded in the future to include richer diagnostic information about SDK configuration such as configured products (bug tracking, performance profiling, replay) or features (e.g. releases, customer sample rates, frameworks, integrations ) and potentially more.

Reviewer 7: Very minor detail, but I would suggest to rephrase the configured products list to "error monitoring, performance monitoring, profiling, replays"
